README.md, before:

# DL_PY2F Example

[![GNU](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/actions/workflows/gnu.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/actions/workflows/gnu.yml)

# About

This package contains a toy application which demonstrates how to use [`DL_PY2F`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f) for the interoperability in both Python-to-Fortran and Fortran-to-Python ways. The package is also a test bench for validating `DL_PY2F`.

## License

`DL_PY2F example` is open source and released under [GNU Lesser General Public License v3.0](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.en.html). It is available for download from the [repository](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example).

## Citing `DL_PY2F`

Applications using `DL_PY2F` should cite:

You Lu and Thomas W. Keal, *Journal of Open Source Software*, in preparation

## Project status

The Python-to-Fortran interoperability demonstrated in `DL_PY2F example` has been comprehensively tested using both GNU and Intel compilers.

:warning: **Warning:** However, the method for Fortran-to-Python interoperability demonstrated in `DL_PY2F example` is still undergoing testing and validation, and is currently limited to use with the GNU compiler gfortran, as the proprietary .mod file format used by the Intel compiler is not yet supported.

# Getting started

## Required libraries and tools


| Tools & Libraries             | Min. version | Note |
|:------------------------------|:-------------|:-----|
| gcc/gfortran                  | 7.3          |      |
| OR icc/ifort                  | 17           | :warning: |
| cmake                         | 3.16         |      |
| python3-dev                   | 3.8          |      |
| python3-numpy                 | 1.21.5       |      |

:bulb: The above package names are based on Ubuntu Linux. They may vary on other
       operating systems.

:warning: The Fortran-to-Python method does **NOT** yet work with the Intel compilers as Intel's proprietary
          .mod file format is unpublished and unsupported.

## Compiling

### Using `DL_PY2F` source code

For compiling and running this example application with the source code of `DL_PY2F`, please follow the steps (bash environment assumed here)

1. Cloning the example package to, e.g., `my_copy` (you probably have done this already):

`$ git clone https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example.git my_copy`

2. Navigating to the example package's source package (which contains this _README.md_ file):

`$ cd my_copy`

3. There is a subdirectory for an example application project:

`$ cd example`

4. Cloning `DL_PY2F` from the repository:

`$ git clone https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f.git dl_py2f`

5. Making a directory for building

`$ mkdir build`

`$ cd build`

6. Configuring and compiling using cmake

`$ cmake -DFROM_SOURCE:BOOL=TRUE ..; make`

Please see the `bash` script [`compile_from_source.sh`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/blob/main/compile_from_source.sh) provided by the example package for this method.

### Using system-installed `DL_PY2F` (Debian only)

:heavy_exclamation_mark: **Caution:** `DL_PY2F` installed this way only works with application projects compiled with **gfortran** due to the precompiled dl_py2f.mod we shipped.

`DL_PY2F` has been published and deployed on [launchpad.net](https://launchpad.net/~dl-py2f/+archive/ubuntu/ppa) and is thus available for installing using `apt` for Debian-type systems (e.g., Ubuntu):

`$ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:dl-py2f/ppa`

`$ sudo apt update`

`$ sudo apt install dl-py2f`

:warning: Since Debian PPA does not allow underscore `_`, the package name published on [launchpad.net](https://launchpad.net/~dl-py2f/+archive/ubuntu/ppa) is **`dl-py2f`** but not `dl_py2f`.

:bulb: `sudo` access is required for installing system-wide packages using `apt`.

Compiling the example package is similar to the steps of the above method, just without cloning `DL_PY2F` or telling `cmake` to use its source code:

`$ git clone https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example.git my_copy`

`$ cd my_copy`

`$ cd example`

`$ mkdir build`

`$ cd build`

`$ cmake ..; make`

Please see the `bash` script [`install_with_apt.sh`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/blob/main/install_with_apt.sh) provided by the example package for this method.

### Using PyPI-distributed `DL_PY2F`

`DL_PY2F` is also available as a [PyPI package](https://pypi.org/project/dl-py2f) and and can be installed using the `pip` command. Define the compilers if you use GNU tools:

`export FC=gfortran; export CC=gcc; export CXX=g++`

or Intel ones (:warning: Only the Python-to-Fortran interoperability works with Intel compilers):

`export FC=ifx; export CC=icx; export CXX=icpx`

We strongly recommend to run it under a Python virtual environment:

`$ python3 -m venv .venv`

`$ source .venv/bin/activate`

`$ pip install --upgrade pip`

`$ pip install dl_py2f`

Please see the `bash` script [`install_with_pip.sh`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/blob/main/install_with_pip.sh) provided by the example package for this method.

## Running

There is an exemplar user input script for launching the example project. To run it, please

1. Navigating to the example package's source package (which contains the current _README.md_ file):

`$ cd my_copy`

2. Define the environment variable `PYTHONPATH` for the example application project:

`$ export PYTHONPATH=my_copy`

3. Run as a user of your example application:

`$ python3 user_script.py`

:bulb: For using `DL_PY2F` in your own real project, there are more ways to organise the source package's structure.

## Cleaning

`$ cd example/build`

`$ make clean`

:bulb: The above-mentioned bash scripts contain all the above steps and are ready for executing.

# Miscellaneous

## Support

Please raise an Issue on the [project's page](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example) if you have a question about the code.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome in the form of Issue/PR on [github.com](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example).

## Acknowledgements

The `DL_PY2F` library was created during the redevelopment of [ChemShell](https://chemshell.org) as a Python-based package, which was funded by EPSRC under the grant [EP/K038419/1](https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=EP/K038419/1). Ongoing support for the development of `DL_PY2F` as part of ChemShell is provided under EPSRC grants [EP/R001847/1](https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=EP%2FR001847%2F1) and [EP/W014378/1](https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=EP%2FW014378%2F1), and the [Computational Science Centre for Research Communities (CoSeC)](https://www.cosec.ac.uk), via the support provided to the [Materials Chemistry Consortium](https://mcc.hec.ac.uk). We acknowledge helpful discussions and suggestions for improvement from Paul Sherwood, Joseph Thacker, and Thomas Durrant.

Commit message:

Also demonstrated with Flang/Clang++

README.md, after:

# DL_PY2F Example

[![GNU](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/actions/workflows/gnu.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/actions/workflows/gnu.yml)

# About

This package contains a toy application which demonstrates how to use [`DL_PY2F`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f) for the interoperability in both Python-to-Fortran and Fortran-to-Python ways. The package is also a test bench for validating `DL_PY2F`.

## License

`DL_PY2F example` is open source and released under [GNU Lesser General Public License v3.0](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.en.html). It is available for download from the [repository](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example).

## Citing `DL_PY2F`

Applications using `DL_PY2F` should cite:

You Lu and Thomas W. Keal, *Journal of Open Source Software*, in preparation

## Project status

The Python-to-Fortran interoperability demonstrated in `DL_PY2F example` has been comprehensively tested using GNU, Intel, and Flang/Clang++ compilers.

:warning: **Warning:** However, the method for Fortran-to-Python interoperability demonstrated in `DL_PY2F example` is still undergoing testing and validation, and is currently limited to use with the GNU compiler gfortran, as the proprietary .mod file format used by the Intel compiler or other compilers' .mod format is not yet supported.

# Getting started

## Required libraries and tools


| Tools & Libraries             | Min. version | Note |
|:------------------------------|:-------------|:-----|
| g++/gfortran                  | 11           |      |
| OR icpc/ifort                 | 17           | :warning: |
| OR icpx/ifx                   | 2024         | :warning: |
| OR clang++/flang              | 22           | :warning: |
| cmake                         | 3.16         |      |
| python3-dev                   | 3.8          |      |
| python3-numpy                 | 1.21.5       |      |

:bulb: The above package names are based on Ubuntu Linux. They may vary on other
       operating systems.

:warning: The Fortran-to-Python method does **NOT** yet work with the Intel compilers as Intel's proprietary
          .mod file format is unpublished and unsupported. Its support for Flang/Clang++ is yet to be implemented.

## Compiling

### Using `DL_PY2F` source code

For compiling and running this example application with the source code of `DL_PY2F`, please follow the steps (bash environment assumed here)

1. Cloning the example package to, e.g., `my_copy` (you probably have done this already):

`$ git clone https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example.git my_copy`

2. Navigating to the example package's source package (which contains this _README.md_ file):

`$ cd my_copy`

3. There is a subdirectory for an example application project:

`$ cd example`

4. Cloning `DL_PY2F` from the repository:

`$ git clone https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f.git dl_py2f`

5. Making a directory for building

`$ mkdir build`

`$ cd build`

6. Configuring and compiling using cmake

`$ cmake -DFROM_SOURCE:BOOL=TRUE ..; make`

Please see the `bash` script [`compile_from_source.sh`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/blob/main/compile_from_source.sh) provided by the example package for this method.

### Using system-installed `DL_PY2F` (Debian only)

:heavy_exclamation_mark: **Caution:** `DL_PY2F` installed this way only works with application projects compiled with **gfortran** due to the precompiled dl_py2f.mod we shipped.

`DL_PY2F` has been published and deployed on [launchpad.net](https://launchpad.net/~dl-py2f/+archive/ubuntu/ppa) and is thus available for installing using `apt` for Debian-type systems (e.g., Ubuntu):

`$ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:dl-py2f/ppa`

`$ sudo apt update`

`$ sudo apt install dl-py2f`

:warning: Since Debian PPA does not allow underscore `_`, the package name published on [launchpad.net](https://launchpad.net/~dl-py2f/+archive/ubuntu/ppa) is **`dl-py2f`** but not `dl_py2f`.

:bulb: `sudo` access is required for installing system-wide packages using `apt`.

Compiling the example package is similar to the steps of the above method, just without cloning `DL_PY2F` or telling `cmake` to use its source code:

`$ git clone https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example.git my_copy`

`$ cd my_copy`

`$ cd example`

`$ mkdir build`

`$ cd build`

`$ cmake ..; make`

Please see the `bash` script [`install_with_apt.sh`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/blob/main/install_with_apt.sh) provided by the example package for this method.

### Using PyPI-distributed `DL_PY2F`

`DL_PY2F` is also available as a [PyPI package](https://pypi.org/project/dl-py2f) and and can be installed using the `pip` command. Define the compilers if you use GNU tools:

`export FC=gfortran; export CXX=g++`

or Intel ones (:warning: Only the Python-to-Fortran interoperability works with Intel compilers):

`export FC=ifx; export CXX=icpx`

or Flang/Clang++ (:warning: Only the Python-to-Fortran interoperability works with Flang/Clang++):

`export FC=flang-22; export CXX=clang++-22`

We strongly recommend to run it under a Python virtual environment:

`$ python3 -m venv .venv`

`$ source .venv/bin/activate`

`$ pip install --upgrade pip`

`$ pip install dl_py2f`

Please see the `bash` script [`install_with_pip.sh`](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example/blob/main/install_with_pip.sh) provided by the example package for this method.

## Running

There is an exemplar user input script for launching the example project. To run it, please

1. Navigating to the example package's source package (which contains the current _README.md_ file):

`$ cd my_copy`

2. Define the environment variable `PYTHONPATH` for the example application project:

`$ export PYTHONPATH=my_copy`

3. Run as a user of your example application:

`$ python3 user_script.py`

:bulb: For using `DL_PY2F` in your own real project, there are more ways to organise the source package's structure.

## Cleaning

`$ cd example/build`

`$ make clean`

:bulb: The above-mentioned bash scripts contain all the above steps and are ready for executing.

# Miscellaneous

## Support

Please raise an Issue on the [project's page](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example) if you have a question about the code.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome in the form of Issue/PR on [github.com](https://github.com/stfc/dl_py2f-example).

## Acknowledgements

The `DL_PY2F` library was created during the redevelopment of [ChemShell](https://chemshell.org) as a Python-based package, which was funded by EPSRC under the grant [EP/K038419/1](https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=EP/K038419/1). Ongoing support for the development of `DL_PY2F` as part of ChemShell is provided under EPSRC grants [EP/R001847/1](https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=EP%2FR001847%2F1) and [EP/W014378/1](https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=EP%2FW014378%2F1), and the [Computational Science Centre for Research Communities (CoSeC)](https://www.cosec.ac.uk), via the support provided to the [Materials Chemistry Consortium](https://mcc.hec.ac.uk). We acknowledge helpful discussions and suggestions for improvement from Paul Sherwood, Joseph Thacker, and Thomas Durrant.
